Every day,
we take around 25,000 breaths of air.
And each breath
contains a gas essential for life
—oxygen.
We need a steady supply of oxygen
because our body cells use it
to produce energy from the food we eat.
But how does oxygen get from your lungs
to the trillions of individual cells
throughout your body?
When you take a breath,
oxygen passes from your lungs
into your bloodstream,
where it’s transported
by the workhorses of oxygen transport
—red blood cells.
Their unique shape and composition
make these cells perfectly suited
to deliver oxygen
precisely where and when it’s needed.
Each one is a tiny disk
with its center curved inward on both sides.
This shape lets the cells bend
and fold themselves
so that they can squeeze
through even the narrowest blood vessels.
Red blood cells are unusual in other ways.
They don’t have a nucleus
or the specialized structures
that other cells need to survive.
For this reason,
red blood cells don’t use up
any of the oxygen they transport.
And their unique makeup
leaves more room
for their most important component
—hemoglobin.
Each red blood cell contains
over 250 million hemoglobin molecules.
Hemoglobin molecules work like tiny machines
absorbing as much oxygen as possible
when red blood cells pass through the lungs.
Each hemoglobin molecule has four locations
where an oxygen molecule can attach.
As soon as an oxygen molecule binds
to one of those locations,
something remarkable happens:
The tightly folded structure
of the hemoglobin changes,
making it possible
for as many as three more oxygen molecules
to be absorbed.
But how does the hemoglobin
know when and where
to deliver the oxygen?
When a part of the body is exerted,
it uses more oxygen.
So as blood travels through your body,
it passes by tissues that need oxygen
and that release carbon dioxide
as waste into the blood.
In the presence of carbon dioxide,
hemoglobin’s bond to oxygen changes.
The oxygen molecules
that have been riding along
can then break free
to be absorbed by other body cells.
As for the carbon dioxide
that needs to be removed,
most of it is chemically changed
and carried by the blood’s plasma.
But some also attaches
to the hemoglobin molecules
and returns to the lungs,
where, along with the carbon dioxide
unloaded from plasma,
it can be exhaled
and where the very next breath
brings in a fresh supply of oxygen
ready for transport.
Constantly zipping through
your body’s thousands of miles of blood vessels,
red blood cells wear out
after only about four months.
But healthy bone marrow continuously produces
up to two million new red blood cells
every second as replacement cells.
And the liver breaks down the worn-out cells
and recycles the iron
found in the hemoglobin molecules.
It’s an amazing system
of delivery, pickup, and disposal.
What do you think?
Did the oxygen transport system
in our bodies,
with its trillions of red blood cells,
simply evolve?
Or was it designed?